Copy-On-Write for Key and KeySet (#4691)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/contrib/copy_on_write.md

# Copy-on-Write

The two basic Elektra datastructures `Key` and `KeySet` implement full copy-on-write (COW) functionality.
If a key or a keyset gets copied, only a shallow copy with references to the original name and value is created.
Only if it gets modified the necessary memory is actually allocated.

> As a consequence, duplicated keys or keysets only require a fraction of the memory compared to their source counterparts.

Author: Wouldn't `doc/dev/data-structures` be a better fit? In there we already describe `Key` and `KeySet`.

## Working principle

The main principle for the copy-on-write approach is simple: seperate the "real" data from the user-facing identifying entity, in our case `Key` and `KeySet`.
Developers using Elektra only get references to `Key` and `KeySet` objects.
Those objects themselves do not hold any data.

> They only contain references to other entities holding the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They only contain references to other entities holding the data.
This allows transparently sharing the data-holding entities between multiple identifying entities.
```

The main entities for copy-on-write are depicted in the following diagram:

```mermaid
classDiagram
    Key *-- "0..1" KeyName : keyName
    Key *-- "0..1" KeyData : keyData

    KeySet *-- "0..1" KeySetData : data

    Key o-- "0..1" KeySet : meta
    KeySetData o-- "*" Key : array

    Key : - uint16_t refs
    Key : - keyflag_t flags

    KeyName : - uint16_t refs
    KeyName : - uint16_t flags

    KeyData : - uint16_t refs
    KeyData : - uint16_t flags

    KeySet : - uint16_t refs
    KeySet : - ksflag_t flags

    KeySetData : - uint16_t refs
    KeySetData : - uint16_t flags

> ```

Reviewer: The Diagram should probably have fields for the actual name, value and key array in the respective structs to show what is stored where.

Author: If you look at the rendered diagram, the field names are on the relationships.

Reviewer: I saw that. I didn't mean the name of the `KeyName` field in `Key`. I meant the `char * name` field in `KeyName`. It's a bit weird that it is absent, when both `refs` and `flags` are shown.

Author: Oooh.... you're right. I added them in `KeyName` and `KeyData`. However, the the key array `KeySetData` is represented by a relationship.

- `Key`: logically represents a key. No real data is actually stored in it.
  - `KeyName`: holds the name of a key. May be shared between multiple `Key` objects.

>   - `KeyData`: holds the value of a key. May be shared between multiple `Key` objects.

Reviewer: It's already called `KeyData` in the decision and I assume the name comes from the fact, that the field in `struct _Key` was already called `data`. So going to `value` would actually be a new name in some sense.

Let's leave it for now. If you want I can rename it later with `tree-surgeon`, one more renaming wouldn't change much.

>   - `KeyData`: holds the value of a key. May be shared between multiple `Key` objects.

Author: Yes, @kodebach's reasoning is correct. I tried to name everything as close as possible to the existing terminology.

- `KeySet`: logically represents a collection of keys. No real data is actually stored in it.
  - `KeySetData`: holds an array of `Key` objects. May be shared between multiple `KeySet` objects.

> When creating instances of `Key` and `KeySet` via `keyNew` or `ksNew`, we allocate the least amount.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating instances of `Key` and `KeySet` via `keyNew` or `ksNew`, we allocate the least amount possible.
```

> When creating instances of `Key` and `KeySet` via `keyNew` or `ksNew`, we allocate the least amount.

Reviewer: > The least amount is for me [...]

That's why it is explained afterwards...

> would that even be possible with the current implementation?

I made a similar comment (https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4691#discussion_r1032767092) and I believe the text was changed already.

> This should be discussed in the decision.

> When creating instances of `Key` and `KeySet` via `keyNew` or `ksNew`, we allocate the least amount.

Author: > would that even be possible with the current implementation? 

Yes. Just set the initial ref count to anything > 0.

> When creating instances of `Key` and `KeySet` via `keyNew` or `ksNew`, we allocate the least amount.

Author: Alternatively, interpret a `NULL` for `keyName` as `/` in `keyGetName` et al.

> For `Key`, we only allocate a `KeyName` entity.

Reviewer: With the current API I don't think even that would be necessary. Since `keyName` and `keyUnescapedName` only return const pointers, they could do:

```c
const char * keyName (Key * key) {
    // [...]
    if (key->keyName == NULL) return "/";
    // [...]
}

const void * keyUnescapedName (Key * key) {
    // [...]
    if (key->keyName == NULL) return "\x01\x00\x00";
    // [...]
}
```

But it might complicate things elsewhere (e.g. `ksCut`), so I propose:

```suggestion
For `Key`, we only allocate a `KeyName` entity (while not technically necessary, it significantly simplifies some internal uses).
```

For `KeySet`, we allocate no other entities.
The missing entities will get allocated when needed.

> If the name of a key gets modified, we first ensure that the key is the singular "owner" of its `KeyName` entity.

Reviewer 2: Please use terminology properly (somewhere write what owner is, what owns mean etc.). We can use owner explicitly for COW, it is currently not used anywhere else (we had another owner concept in the past, but this, except of small left-overs waiting to be removed, not present anymore).

```suggestion
If the name of a key gets modified, we first ensure that the key is the single owner of its `KeyName` entity.
```

Author: This has already been changed. I think you commented on a pretty outdated version of the documentation.

> If the name of a key gets modified, we first ensure that the key is the singular "owner" of its `KeyName` entity.
> It it isn't, then a new `KeyName` object is allocated for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the name of a key gets modified, we first ensure that the `Key` holds the only reference to its `KeyName`.
If it isn't, then a new `KeyName` object is allocated for it.
```

Since we're using reference counting it's easier to phrase it that way IMO. Otherwise, we'd have to define ownership semantics on top of the refcount.

Depending on the type of modification, the value of the name is also copied.

> The modifications to the name are then performed on the now exclusively owned `KeyName` entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The modifications to the name are then performed on the new `KeyName` entity.
```

> The same applies for the value of a key, and for keysets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same applies for the value of a key, and for the data contained in keysets.
```

> When copying the name or value of a key, or data of a keyset, via `keyCopy`, `ksCopy`, `keyDup` or `ksDup`, point the according references to the entities of the `source` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When copying the name or value of a key, or data of a keyset, via `keyCopy`, `ksCopy`, `keyDup` or `ksDup`, we point the according references in the `destination` object to the entities of the `source` object.
```

The reference counter of those entities is increased accordingly.

> The entities of the `destination` object will get their reference count decreased, and if they reach 0 they will be `free`d.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The previous entities of the `destination` object will get their reference count decreased, and if they reach 0 they will be `free`d.
```

> ## Reference counting

Reviewer: I think this should be explained before the details above.

All entities are reference counted.
The reference count is stored in each entity in an unsigned 16-bit integer variable `refs`.
The special value `UINT16_MAX` is reserved as an error indicator, so the maximum number of references for each entity is `UINT16_MAX - 1` or 65534.

> The reference counting mechanismns for `Key` and `KeySet` are part of the public API. The reference counting mechanismns for `KeyName`, `KeyData` and `KeySetData` are private.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reference counting mechanismns for `Key` and `KeySet` are part of the public API.
```

AFAICT `KeyName`, `KeyData` and `KeySetData` are entirely private, so their refcount API obviously must be  private too.

> The reference counting mechanismns for `Key` and `KeySet` are part of the public API. The reference counting mechanismns for `KeyName`, `KeyData` and `KeySetData` are private.

Reviewer 2: Do we have a use case for reference counting as part of the API?

Afaik keyGetRef is nowhere used. This should be part of references decision (@kodebach).

Reviewer: > Do we have a use case for reference counting as part of the API?

Bindings

> Afaik keyGetRef is nowhere used.

That part may be unnecessary.

> This should be part of references decision

Agreed, let's not discuss it here and leave things as they are.

> A value of 0 for `KeyName`, `KeyData` and `KeySetData` is illegal, except directly after it is allocated or directly before it is going to be `free`d.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reference count of 0 for `KeyName`, `KeyData` and `KeySetData` is illegal outside the public API function calls that cause the creation/deletion these structures.
```

"directly before/after" is very vague. The important part here is that effectively a struct is never stored with refcount 0. Either the refcount will increase before we return from a public API function, or the struct will be deleted. Maybe you have a better way to phrase this...

## Integration with `mmapstorage`

> The `mmapstorage` plugin needs a flag for every entity to indicate whether the entity is stored via `mmap` or normally allocated via `malloc`. If an entity is flagged as being stored in `mmap`, it must **never** be freed using `free`.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be in the mmap internals docu?

Author: Well it plays a part in the implementation for COW also, so I think it fits in there.
